+++
title = "Excel & VBA"
author = ["Ryan Fleck"]
draft = false
toc = true
summary = "Enterprise grade spreadsheeting."
chapter = true
aliases = ["/xlsx/", "/xlsm/", "/xls"]
warning = "THIS FILE WAS GENERATED BY OX-HUGO, DO NOT EDIT!!!"
+++

# Introduction {#introduction}

Man has always had the spreadsheet for working purposes.

Martin Shkreli has a [Finance Lessons](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=VI_riscmviI&list=PLJsVF3gZDcuTxcdH5FmQRTd6MiJ29X_OQ) playlist[^fn:1] with a focus on Excel.

> "I'll create a GUI interface in Visual Basic, see if I can track an IP
> address." -- [Meme](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ygB0ZviqXac)


# Learning Resources {#learning-resources}

1.  [Microsoft: Develop solutions and customize Excel](https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/office/client-developer/excel/excel-home?redirectedfrom=MSDN)
2.  [Microsoft: Excel VBA Reference](https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/office/vba/api/overview/excel)


# What are Macros? {#what-are-macros}

**Examples:**

-   Automatically formatting a report every time new data is added.
-   Copying and pasting data across sheets without manual effort.
-   Generating and sending automated emails based on Excel data.
-   Importing and cleaning up data from external sources.


# Writing Simple Macros with VBA {#writing-simple-macros-with-vba}

Before starting, let's set up Excel for hacking.

1.  **Enable the developer menu** at File, Options, Customize Ribbon, and
    enable `Developer`.
2.  **Hit Alt-F11.** This will open the VBA editor.
3.  Ensure your file is saved as **xlsm**. If you do not **save as xlsm** all
    of your macros will be lost if you close the file.

Generally in this section we will cover the following:

-   How to record a macro
-   Editing recorded macros in VBA
-   Assigning macros to buttons and shortcuts
-   The Visual Basic for Applications (VBA) editor
-   VBA syntax and structure
-   Variables, data types, and scope
-   Conditional statements (If/Else, Select Case)
-   Loops (For, While, Do Until)


## Recording a Simple Macro {#recording-a-simple-macro}

In your sample document (whatever you want) click `Developer > Record
Macro`, don't bother setting a shortcut, and perform a few actions.
Then hit `Developer > Stop Recording`.

```vba
Sub Macro1()
   '
   ' Macro1 Macro
   ' Set Column Types
   '

   ' Set the column to date format
   Columns("A:A").Select
   Selection.NumberFormat = "m/d/yyyy"
   Columns("A:A").EntireColumn.AutoFit
   ' Set the top item in the column
   Range("A1").Select
   Selection.NumberFormat = "General"
   Selection.Font.Bold = True
End Sub
```


## Assigning Macros to Buttons {#assigning-macros-to-buttons}

To reassign the macro to another keybinding in the future, you can hit
`Developer > Macros` and in the `Options` for your macro edit the shortcut
and description.

Form buttons can be added to sheets with `Developer > Insert > Button
(Form Control)` - clicking the button will then run the macro.


## The Visual Basic for Applications (VBA) editor {#the-visual-basic-for-applications--vba--editor}


## VBA syntax and structure {#vba-syntax-and-structure}


## Variables, data types, and scope {#variables-data-types-and-scope}


## Conditional statements (If/Else, Select Case) {#conditional-statements--if-else-select-case}


## Loops (For, While, Do Until) {#loops--for-while-do-until}


# Manipulating Tables in VBA {#manipulating-tables-in-vba}

-   The Object Model (Workbooks, Worksheets, Ranges)
-   Selecting, copying, and formatting cells
-   Manipulating rows, columns, and tables


## The Object Model (Workbooks, Worksheets, Ranges) {#the-object-model--workbooks-worksheets-ranges}


## Selecting, copying, and formatting cells {#selecting-copying-and-formatting-cells}


## Manipulating rows, columns, and tables {#manipulating-rows-columns-and-tables}


# Power Automate {#power-automate}

Power Automate is a shiny new toy from Microsoft that enables the easy
creation of macro-style event-driven workflows in the cloud. While not
as powerful as macros, there are a certain number of useful tasks that
can be performed with power automate.

[^fn:1]: From [Hacker News](https://news.ycombinator.com/item?id=40682785) - "So there's this weird playlist about Excel by Martin Shkreli of all people..."
